I'm Jason Lengstorf,
I am very excited today to be
teaching everybody about ChatOps.
I will specifically be teaching
about Slack and Notion today, but
the concepts that we're gonna cover
will extend to any chat tool that
has an API and any note taking or
project management tool that has an API.
You'll be able to carry these
across to whichever one fits your
particular work setup.
I chose Slack because Slack seems
to be the most popular currently.
Well, I guess other than Microsoft Teams,
but I don't know Microsoft Teams,
I haven't worked with it,
I've always worked with Slack.
So we're gonna be going there.
And then Notion,
mainly because Notion is what I use and
it's what I use to manage
my teams in previous jobs.
But you could also apply these same
concepts to GitHub issues, to Jira,
to Linear, to Trello, or any of
the other tools that would allow you to
keep track of your work and
incoming requests.
So first, what is ChatOps?
Why does it exist, and
why are we doing it?
So ChatOps is the idea of bringing
common tasks that your team does
into your chat tool rather than
asking people to switch contexts.
And the reason this is important is that,
what I've noticed at least is that,
when you work on a team that
manages inbound requests,
your Slack channel will often become the
place where people come to ask for things.
And that makes sense.
Well, a lot of us are on remote teams,
when you are discussing work,
it is usually being
done in a team channel.
And that work leads to ideas, tasks,
things that need to be followed up on.
So the good part about this is that we've
got this very clear place to discuss and
have ideas and brainstorm for
what we should be doing
that'll get the best outcomes.
The downside, though, is that then it sort
of turns Slack into a project management
tool, where somebody has to keep track
of what messages were sent, whether or
not somebody's followed up on them.
And that typically leads to somebody
having to be sort of the channel admin or
channel secretary,
who has to take these messages and
transcribe them over or
transport them over to another medium.
So in our case, when I was at Netlify,
what we had was effectively what
we call the week's kind of admin, we had
a funny name for it that I'm forgetting.
But it's effectively the channel admin,
and
their job was to do this
sort of admin work.
If a question came into the Slack channel,
they had to go and
take that request and translate it into
our to-do list, which was in Notion.
They had to go make sure that
everybody got a response.
They had to be looking at the requests
that were open, and making sure
that somebody was paying attention to them
that they'd been triaged and assigned.
And it was really everybody on
the team dreaded that week.
And because there were six of us, so
it only came every month and a half or so.
But that week was a terrible week
because you didn't get to do anything,
you were just sort of monitoring
things and doing paperwork.
And that's not what anybody, especially
if you're not hired specifically to
do that job,
if your job isn't to be a project manager.
Getting an assignment of being a project
manager for a week is usually something
that drains people of energy, and
that's not what we want, right?
So ChatOPs is the idea of
trying to outsource as much of
that busy work as we can to an app.
So what we're trying to get to here
is compliance via convenience.
When you have a process,
you are attempting to get
people to follow that process.
So when my team had our Slack channel,
we would try things like saying,
if you have a request,
you need to put it into Notion.
If you want a follow-up,
you need to put it here so that we see it.
And people weren't unwilling to do it,
but they would forget.
And when they forgot, that meant that
somebody on the team had to go and
be the code cop and tell everybody,
you got to go do the thing.
And that was a mild confrontation,
nobody was really angry or upset.
But being put in a spot where you have
to tell somebody that they did something
wrong is a tiny bit of tension that
drains your energy throughout the day.
And so instead, what we were
aiming to do with this ChatOps and
why we leaned this way
is that we made it so
that it was easier to do the right
thing than to do the messy.
Like drop a request in Slack and
then hope somebody follows up on it.
Because what we're hoping for is that
people want to do something that is
convenient, they want
to do the easy thing.
And if you can give them a shortcut
that is the correct thing to do,
it's the most compliant thing that
they can do with the given process,
then they'll take that shortcut.
Not out of adherence to the rules or
anything, but
because it's the fastest and
least painful thing that they can do.
This was a huge win for us when we
put this in place because it meant
that we were able to actually
remove the admin rotation and
let people focus instead on doing
the job they were hired to do.
And so this was a really powerful
thing that we were able to build.
And I wanna, This is one of
those things that, I feel like it's easy
to brush this off as this isn't important.
Internal tooling is something that we're
seeing happen more and more in companies.
We see people talk about the value and
need for internal tooling,
we're seeing internal
tooling teams stand up.
And I'm really, really excited about that
because that hasn't always been the case.
In a lot of companies,
internal tools are seen as,
they're not aligned with
the priorities of the company, right?
Well, why are we building software for
us instead of for our customers?
And you get these arguments
that the tools we're building,
it's not the best use of engineering
time or something like that.
But the problem is that nobody
wants to be a process cop.
Nobody wants to be the one who is
monitoring other people's behavior and
then having to nudge them gently to do the
right thing when they miss the process.
Because again,
people aren't doing this work to be mean,
they're not skipping your process because
they don't like you or don't respect you.
It's because everybody's busy and every
team has a lot of different processes.
And it's very easy to forget which team
has which process, where you're supposed
to put things if you want this team
to look at it versus that team.
And that forgetfulness is not malice,
it's just everybody's busy and
there's a lot of things to keep track of.
So automating things allows to
get rid of the process cop,
and instead put in place a process bot.
And the process bot is impartial,
it's very level, and
it's not accusatory,
it's just you saying, this is a process.
And if you do something that
doesn't follow the process,
the bot just reminds you, hey,
you gotta do the process.
And you're making it very friendly and
easy for
people to then follow that process, which,
again, they're not doing it out of spite.
If they are, you've got a whole different
problem, but for the most part,
people aren't doing things out of spite.
They're doing things because they forgot,
because doing it according to
the process takes a lot more time.
They've got a context switch and
get out of the chat app, and
then open up the project management
app and fill out this form.
And it just gets them, you don't
have time for that, so you're like,
I'll do it later, right,
I'll do that later.
And then you don't deal with it later, but
then you still need that work done, so
you end up relying on the Slack message.
So you just want a way to
make things more friendly and
more accessible for
the rest of your team so
that they can participate in the process
in a way that feels natural.
It's the most convenient thing,
because again, we're going for compliance
via convenience, not through being strict
or draconian about your processes.
You don't want anybody to
have to be a process cop.